# A systems approach on plasma proteomics reveals the implication of KITLG signaling in critical COVID-19


Recently, two small COVID-19 plasma proteomic studies showed that the cytokine called KITLG (Stem Cell Factor) was: (a) significantly decreased in critical COVID-19 cases and (b) strongly correlated with anti-Sars-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies. Since this humoral factor is critical for normal myeloid and lymphoid hematopoiesis, we decided to analyze the voluminous plasma proteomic Massachusetts General Hospital dataset (MGH, Olink PEA technology, >300 cases, >1000 plasma proteins, Day 0-3-7) for further in-silico evidence regarding KITLG implication in COVID-19. Initially, based on the WHO ordinal scale, COVID-19 patients were stratified in critical (WHO1-2-3: fatal or ICU-intubated) and non-critical cases (WHO4-5-6: Severe-Mild-Moderate cases). Then, through linear mixed models (Day 0-7), KITLG and its cognate receptor KIT (c-Kit, CD117) were both found significantly decreased in critical COVID-19 cases (logFC: -0.31 | p<0.01) (logFC: -0.7 | p<0.001). Furthermore, GSEA pathway enrichment via WebGestald on perturbed plasma proteomics confirmed that Kit receptor signaling pathway (WP304) was the most significantly decreased pathway in critical COVID-19 (normalized enrichment score: -1.8 | p<0.01). Moreover, protein-protein interaction network based on STRINGApp8 in Cytoscape unraveled central positions of KITLG/KIT based on the Subgraph algorithm9 among other perturbed plasma proteins (top-60 out of 1182 proteins). Additionally, KITLG and KIT (Day 0 values) ranked high (top-3) among other clinical covariates in a binary classification XGBoost model for COVID-19 severity (AUC: 0.71), according to Shapley values at Explainable AI model. Next, protein co-expression networks designed with the PROTEXA pipeline (ARACNEA, FAST GREEDY algorithms, Day 0,3,7) revealed multiple correlations among differentially abundant protein members of the KITLG/KIT signaling pathway. Interestingly, KIT co-expressed in Day 0 and 3 in distinct clusters with two increased, negative regulators of the KITLG/KIT signaling pathway namely MMP-9 and the phosphatase PTPN6. Moreover, on Day 7, decreased KITLG/KIT co-localized with the increased phosphatase SH2B3 (inhibitor of KITLG signaling)13 and YES1 in the same co-expression cluster that associated through pathway enrichment (Enrichr) with the pathway “KIT signaling regulation” (p<0.001). Lastly, to assess the importance of KITLG across multiple COVID-19 proteomic datasets, differential meta-analysis was performed on MGH and 3 other similar proteomic datasets which revealed that KITLG was one among the few commonly decreased plasma proteins between critical and non-critical cases (logFC:-0.6 | p<0.001). Overall, these findings highlight the implication of KITLG signaling in critical COVID-19 thus pointing towards further consideration of this pathway for future patient stratification, clinical prediction and pharmacological interventions which could revert waning lymphopoiesis.
